If you look at some of these massive
challenges that we face, sometimes I
want to pull my hair out if I look at
these billionaires who could make a
massive difference. We are living
through [music] incredible world
historic times.
>> Rutka Bregman, writer, historian, a man
who calls today's elites decadent and
corrupt.
>> There are so many people currently stuck
in jobs that [music] don't really make
the world a better place. You know,
consultancy, finance, and corporate law.
>> Could be one of your kids one day. Well,
maybe, but
>> how would you feel if that happens?
>> I mean, slightly disappointed, I guess.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, [music]
this is the Michelle Hussein show.
If there's a single moment in the year
that symbolizes wealth and power, it's
arguably the one that's just taken place
in the Swiss Alps. Davos, attended again
this year by President Trump. Rutka
Bregman knows what appearing at Davos
can do for your reach and profile
because his reputation was really made
when he went there in 2019 and the
argument he made over the rich paying
their taxes ended up going viral.
>> And I mean I hear people talking in the
language of participation and justice
and equality and transparency. But then
I mean almost no one raises the real
issue of tax avoidance, right? And of
the rich just not paying their fair
share. I mean,
>> since then, he's written books about
changing the systems around us, the ones
where the biggest rewards are in finance
and other top corporates. He is,
however, more nuanced than you might
expect. He does believe in the power of
businessmen and women to do good, and
he's channeling his own book profits,
towards an organization aimed at action
rather than mere commentary. What you're
about to hear is a particularly
wide-ranging conversation where we pivot
from one topic to another because Rutka
Bregman does have a lot of views on
almost everything that's happening
around us. You'll also hear him talk
about his recent clash with the BBC. He
accused them of censoring his view of
President Trump. And you'll hear more
detail on that as well as the White
House position at the end. We start
though with his analysis of America and
Europe today. Both he says are declining
in different ways.
So let's start with near-term history. I
think we all remember February 2020,
right? This moment when really
knowledgeable people, super forecasters
were like, you got to stockpile masks
right now. And you looked at say the
telly, BBC, whatever, and it was like
it's a Chinese virus. It's going to be
fine. It's probably nothing big. I
really feel we're in that moment right
now in two respects. Uh obviously with
the rise of AI, we talk about it a lot,
but the vast majority of people have no
idea what's going to hit them in the
next 3, four or 5 years. And the other
thing is just the complete breakdown of
everything. Uh historians of fascism,
I'm afraid I have to use that word, have
developed a very precise terminology to
talk about different regimes. And I
think the family resemblances, you know,
the lists, you know, it's getting pretty
pretty long now and it's very striking
for me as a historian to see the
resemblances to some of the darkest
periods.
>> Can I dig into the first part of what
you've said in the first instance? The
idea that AI is like the equivalent of a
pandemic setting in. Do you see it as
negative?
>> Well, it is like people don't seem to
realize just how big it is. That for me
is the metaphor. So, this is not just
another technology. It's really like the
industrial revolution or the
agricultural revolution. I think many
people do see it like that. We can
already see its effect on jobs.
>> Not really. Yeah. A little bit here and
there. But this is about what it means
to be human. Uh that's what what this is
about.
>> So you're seeing it as more negative
than positive. That what it takes away
is going to be much more than what it
gives us
>> with this speed. More negative. my very
first book that I wrote a decade ago, a
lot of that was about what we called
robots back then and indeed automation
and the extraordinary utopian potential
of these technologies. It's just that
the way we're doing it right now, I
think there are two massive risks. One
is misaligned AI. Um that is already
happening, just basically AI going rogue
and us not being in control anymore.
>> Example of that you'd site. Um I mean
there are many examples in the
literature of you know researchers
giving AI certain tasks and then at some
point they discover it's doing something
else instead. So we have proven that it
is possible. The other thing that we
should be really worried about is
enormous power concentration. We have
already started to see that happening in
the last 10 to 15 years with
>> you mean which companies or do you mean
which parts of the world?
>> Yeah. And here it's mainly uh the US
right
>> and China a bit but yeah I mean that's
that's one of the things I talk about in
the wre youth lectures is if you talk
about leadership in the US right now for
me two words come to mind which is a
combination of immorality and
unseriousness but if I look at European
elites I would add a third word which is
irrelevance
it's kind of Europe is squeezed in the
middle and I just came back after a year
of living in New York and if there's one
thing that struck me is how many
American elites on both sides of
political spectrum look at Europe and
are like, "Yeah, that's Venice, you
know, it's an open air museum. Doesn't
matter [laughter] that much anymore."
>> And but just before we talk more about
that, because I am interested in that
parallel and you're not excited by the
promise of AI and I'm thinking
particularly of drug discovery or of
climate and finding energy efficiency
and you know finding those ways of of
the world. I'm super excited about that.
My very first book, the first line of
that book was in the past everything was
worse. We made tremendous progress in
the fight against poverty, against
disease. It's very hard for us to wrap
our head around how horrible life was
for most of human history. Even if you
were a royalty in the UK, you had Queen
Anne who had 17 children and they all
died before the age of 18. All all of
them. Today, they would all be alive
thanks to modern technology and and
medical technology. So, I I would be the
last one to deny the extraordinary
promise and potential of this
technology. But,
>> you want it controlled? Do you want it
regulated? Isn't that what Europe's
quite good at? Doing the regulating side
of it.
>> Well, let's look back at these
transition. I mean, the industrial
revolution for at least a century, it
was pretty bad for most people. The
Ludites, you know, famous for smashing
machines in the 19th century. They were
basically right. They were losing their
jobs. They were not unskilled laborers.
They were very skilled, you know, the
cloth weavers makers. They lost their
job and they became much poorer because
of it. And you could say, well, in the
long run, in the long run, we're all
dead, as John Mayor Kane said. And you
could also look at another technological
revolution which happened way earlier,
10,000 years ago, the agricultural
revolution. And that's an example of
something that made life worse for
everyone for thousands of years.
Basically, population started growing,
but people had a worse diet. The age of
hierarchy and inequality dawned and
wars, and it was probably better to be a
nomatic hunter gatherer. So, a jury is
still out. We don't know yet.
>> When you use history and you're doing it
now as we talk to to guide us around the
present Europe, right? So you've you've
just come back from living in the US.
You've returned to Europe. Why were you
living in the US in the first place?
What's the choice that you made there?
>> So I wrote a book called Moral Ambition,
which is all about using what you have,
your talent, your time, your capital,
your resources to make a massive
difference, to make this world a wildly
better place. We think that the waste of
talent is one of the greatest wastes of
our time. There are so many people
currently stuck in jobs that don't
really make the world a better place.
>> Yeah. Maybe AI is going to start doing
some of those.
>> That's true. And honestly, also after a
decade of basically being a pundit, uh I
was a bit fed up with myself. You know,
here I was.
>> What did you do in the States?
>> I quit my job and I co-founded an
organization called the School for Moral
Ambition. And we like to see ourselves
as the Robin Hoods of talent. So we
recruit the most talented people we can
find that in another life would go on
and work at a hedge fund or I don't know
McKenzie JP Morgan and instead we
convince them to work on the most
pressing issues that we face as a
species AI safety pandemic prevention
global poverty climate change you name
it we believe that the most ambitious
people ought to be working on the most
pressing problems so um yeah that's why
I was there and we built the US chapter
we just launched our first fellowship at
Harvard
>> I think you're partly funded by
philanthropy, aren't you? And yet,
you're pretty harsh on philanthropy.
Yeah, most of them in your writings.
[laughter]
You're clearly quite subjective in which
philanthropist you like and which you
don't. Is there are you only like the
ones who fund your kind of work?
>> Well, look, if you give money to uh
let's say a hedgehant masquerading as a
university, for example. No, I'm not I'm
not very impressed with you. A lot of
philanthropy is BS, is PR, is
whitewashing your motivation, your rep
places like Harvard funds scholarships a
lot of the time
>> for students who couldn't otherwise
afford to go there
>> and and really big buildings obviously I
mean look at the size of that endowment
I'm not saying it's all wasted but if
you look at some of these massive
challenges that we face sometimes I want
to pull my hair out if I look at these
billionaires who could make a massive
difference um you know I recently spoke
to Nick Allardis of Gift Directly which
is one of the greatest NOS's in the
world you know they have found the way
to tackle global poverty, which is just
give people money. There's enormous
amounts of evidence now that that works.
There are thousands of people, thousands
of billionaires in the world who could
call up Nick out of this right now and
say, "Let's pull Malawi out of poverty."
And they would I mean, that would be, I
don't know, a year in the stock market
for them in terms of what what it would
cost. So yes, I'm quite critical of a
lot of wealthy people because I think
they ought to be doing way more uh
especially as we face a poly crisis, so
many massive challenges that are so
neglected.
>> So is European leadership in a better
place than American leadership?
>> No, not really. No. [laughter] Well, you
could say that like the um the
decadence, the corruption is not as bad.
I mean I think in in the US we really
see the collapse of democracy and it is
really unclear whether we will have free
and fair elections in 2028. I mean
people like Steve Bannon are very openly
talking about a third term. If you
listen to people like Steven Miller
basically the prime minister in the US
right now it's an entire worldview um
that believes that if you have the power
you can just do whatever you want. Trump
himself literally saying the only check
on what I do is my own head. It's my own
morality. He's used executive power a
lot and there are challenges to it, but
a lot of them have failed and the
Supreme Court has the makeup that it
has.
>> Why do you say that you don't think
Europe is much better? Because we're
also at a moment where we're seeing
America project military might or
threaten to project its military might
in more than one part of the world. And
you see Europe,
>> which is a place where most countries
are part of an alliance against Russia
supporting Ukraine.
>> That's true. The main problem of Europe
is frankly its weakness. I'll give you a
couple of examples.
A few years ago, the EU proudly
announced its AI act to the world. The
first major regulation of artificial
intelligence. The problem is we hardly
have any AI companies to speak of. So
we're we've become really good at
regulating industries we don't have. You
know, I like to say that we've become
the continent of handbags instead of
hardware. So if you really believe that
this liberal social democratic model is
the way we should rule the world, then
it would be quite nice if you also have
the power to back it up. And the reality
right now is that indeed thousands of
young men are dying in the trenches in
Ukraine. And we're quite dependent on
Daddy Trump, as my fellow Dutchman Mara,
current head of NATO, would say it. And
that's an embarrassing and painful
position to be in, but it is the
reality. But I imagine that someone from
your background also has qualms about
the pivot in European budgets towards
more military funding which is because
of Ukraine and in the face of what's
happening with Russia. So how do you
square that?
>> I don't have those squams. The only
thing I I worried about is that we're
mainly spending that money to buy more
American weapons while we should have
those industries ourselves.
>> You think if Europe manufactures weapons
rather than handbags, that's a better
place for Europe to be. [clears throat]
>> Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. If there's one
thing we can learn from history is that
values and ideals are worth very little
if you don't have the power to back them
up. In this book, I talk a lot about the
British abolitionists. Abolitionism was
a failure pretty much everywhere. In the
Netherlands, in Spain, in Portugal, in
the US, it hardly took off. Britain was
different. Here it became a massive
movement. In 1807, the slave trade was
abolished after hundreds of thousands of
people had signed petitions, joined
consumer boycots. But then what happened
is that the British Royal Navy was able
to force 80% of other countries to stop
slave trading as well. Like power
mattered in that respect. Politics is
for
>> you tell that very inspiring story in
your book and you pick other inspiring
stories like those who resisted the
Nazis. So what is the equivalent today?
Who do you see that gives you hope?
>> For us it's easy to look back on the
moral atrocities of the past, right? I
think most people watching this will be
like, "Yeah, slavery was really bad and
child sacrifices and witch hunts." But,
you know, someday historians will look
back on us and maybe by pure coincidence
we're the first civilization that has
figured it all out and we're like the
good people. I would say that's rather
unlikely. There are still things going
on that are absolutely horrific. The way
we treat animals is probably the most
obvious example.
>> You're a vegan, I think.
>> Yeah, I am. But I don't think that's my
big contribution to making the world a
better place. I mean for 50 years vegans
have shouted go vegan didn't make a big
difference
>> but it's a personal commitment in line
with what you're saying.
>> Sure. Sure. But the real personal
commitment would be building a movement
actually achieving results because we
need a mix here of lobbying of new
technologies of alternative proteins. Um
I think one of the problems that
happened in you know in my world so many
people progressives liberals on the left
they are obsessed with their own
environmental footprint. They don't eat
meat. They don't fly. They don't even
have kids. But the problem is that if
you do everything right in that
scenario, then your footprint is zero.
You might as well have died. Um that's
not really how we are going to save the
world.
>> So my question was where your sources of
hope are, right? So is it people? Is it
anyone who's coalescing or building some
kind of community around a cause you
support?
>> So my dad is a minister. I grew up, you
know, uh, sitting in the church on
Sunday, uh, hearing the answers to the
five great questions of religion. Who
are we as a species? Where do we come
from? Where do we go? How should we
live? And what is sacred? And for me,
the old answers that theology provides
don't work anymore. I find the answers
to those questions in history. So my
heroes and my saints are indeed people
like William Wilberforce, Thomas
Clarkson, Susan B. Anthony, the great
moral pioneers of the
>> box. You put her in your book. Yeah. And
we can learn so much from you.
>> We can. But where are those figures
today? You must be part of a world where
you're looking at examples.
>> Oh, there there are so many of them.
It's just that very often they're not
very famous. Something I deeply care
about is malaria. You know, one of the
most horrible diseases taking 600,000
lives every year. Extremely neglected.
From the left to the right, very few
people people
>> much bigger killer than people realize.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And there's a guy named Rob
Marthur here in London who built the
Against Malaria Foundation, which is one
of the most effective charities in the
whole world. It's basically in another
world, he would have been one of the
richest hedge fund managers, but he
chose to use that incredible an
analytical talent, you know, the the
ability to really build a juggernaut, a
machine to take on this horrible
atrocity. I mean this is a guy if he
would have died by some unfortunate
accident 20 years ago more than 100,000
people would not be alive because they
would have succumbed to malaria.
>> So but let's take an example like that
because your latest book is called moral
ambition and you've talked about moral
revolutions as part of the lectures you
gave on the BBC as well. So isn't there
a moral dilemma then for someone like
you that you you get money from
philanthropist maybe the more moral
thing if you really believe in his work
is to say you know fund him rather than
my office. Sure. I'm the biggest funer
of this whole thing, by the way.
Everything I earn with the book is going
into the movement. I think it's
important to practice what you preach in
that respect. But I also love working
with morally ambitious entrepreneurs. I
mentioned the British abolitionists. Of
the 12 founders of the British Society
for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, 10
were entrepreneurs. The reason they
achieved very little in France was
because it was mainly writers and
intellectuals who didn't know how to go
from zero to one. So, if there's
anything I've come to really like and
enjoy is being in the company of
entrepreneurs, people who have skin in
the game, who know what it takes. It's
just that I think it's so sad that so
much of that entrepreneurial energy is
currently going to waste. What I found
really interesting is that most of the
push back to this book has actually come
from the left uh of people who say, "No,
you can't change things. It's we need
systemic change. You can't ask
individuals or small groups to do their
thing." Whereas your
>> well actually on the rightwing side of
the political spectrum a lot of people
said like Rugger you're basically right
indeed we should do away more
>> political hope you know you clearly
follow politics incredibly closely
>> someone like Zoran Mandani got elected
in New York while you were living there
right
>> what does he represent to you does he
show that the American political system
is not broken there were plenty of
billionaires who were backing his rival
rather than him
>> yeah for me it was a very joyful thing
to see so finally a Democrat politician
who understands the attentional game
basically how politics works. I mean he
understands social media as well as
Donald Trump seems to understand it. So
that was one thing. The other thing he
turns out to be much more of a
pragmatist than a lot of people
appreciate it in advance. Right? So he's
very open to working together with more
centrist liberals. He's excited about
what they call the abundance agenda
which is something I talk about in my
lectures as well. I mean, it's not just,
you know, old-fashioned redistribution
that we need here, although we do need
some of that, but we also need to
actually we need quite some
deregulation. Not in the old neoliberal
sense, you know, to just make
shareholders richer, but to um unlock
the economy, to build the things that
people actually need from housing to
clean energy. And what I like about this
guy is that he doesn't seem to be this
old, you know, traditional socialist who
has mainly been reading German
philosophers, but he seems to uh, you
know, look at the world as it really is
and be quite curious and learn new
things.
>> You said he understands social media as
well as um, President Trump does. I
think you have expressed some concern if
you like about the way that he has he's
had very simple messages that help get
him elected because I think you have a
suspicion of very simple political
>> message but this is the classic dilemma
of populism right so you need certain
populist
>> yeah of course he is of course
>> and you don't have a problem with that
[clears throat] no
>> as long as it's a populist from the left
>> I think every good democratic populist
has a lot of populism and I'm like some
populism on all sides of the political
spectrum is what you need to really yeah
give people the feeling that you are
speaking for them I think that's totally
fine but the question is what happens
after that can you deliver um a good
example is rent control right super
popular we know that at the same time
economists are very very clear and it's
not it's not just the Chicago boys
economists who don't like rent controls
it just doesn't work it usually makes
the problem worse so this is one of
those cases where I hope that Mandani
will be smart enough
>> the hardest of his pledges is probably
delivering the child care.
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> The most expensive one. Yeah. What's at
stake if he doesn't succeed?
>> A lot. A lot. I think it's incredibly
important that people like him actually
deliver. We see the same thing here in
the UK, right? Where the star government
is so so unpopular. And I guess for
understandable reason,
>> you think they're trying to deliver.
>> Oh, I'm sure they're trying.
>> Cuz I [clears throat] know you call
yourself a social democrat, which is
exactly what they'd call themselves.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's just that I see myself
as an old-fashioned social democrat and
very often I look at what passes as
social democracy today and I'm like that
that's not what I signed up for. For me,
social democracy is about
progress. It's about innovation. It's
about patriotism. All these things that
we have given away.
>> You've told us a little bit already
about um how you grew up the son of a of
a pastor in the Netherlands. So,
>> did you grow up believing in God?
>> Oh, absolutely. as a child it was
inculcated in you and you had a strong
religious faith of course I'm saying had
because I think you then lost your faith
>> yeah I did
>> why and when did that happen
>> yeah it was around when I was 16 17
years old um I wrote my first essay
around that time it was about free will
what we just talked about and I came to
the conclusion like free will cannot
possibly exist because
I didn't choose who I am like I didn't
choose my genes my my my parents my
passport there's Whenever we make a
choice as humans, it's always, you know,
the coming together of all kinds of
causes. It's super complicated, of
course. Uh, but the whole notion of me
choosing certain things didn't make
sense. And then everything started to
collapse around me. The whole notion of
heaven and hell, a divine will. Then
when you learn more about stuff like, I
don't know, the theory of evolution, uh,
it only goes down down from there. But I
have been, you know, instilled with this
this notion that these big questions of
religion are important. And I think
today there are a lot of people uh in
this city, in this country, around the
world walking around with a hole in
their soul. You know, really a
god-shaped hole, if you will. They miss
something. And um we got to do to your
relationship with your parents when you
decided you didn't believe anymore.
>> My parents are the loveliest people. So
I had some fights with my dad. Uh but
the the problem is he has a PhD in
poetry. So his view of religion is that
you know it's it's like one big metaphor
or something. So I would come up to him
and say dad did Jesus die on the cross
for our sins yes or no give me an answer
10 seconds and he would be like get out
of here. Don't ask me such vulgar
questions. So um yeah we never clashed
in that way. And as I became older, I
started to realize that maybe we use
different words, engage in different
rituals, but the differences aren't that
big. Actually, what what I found
fascinating,
>> you're still striving for a better
world.
>> Absolutely. I
>> guess in the same way that
>> what I find fascinating as I studied
these abolitionists was how important
religion was. Um, I used to think that
it was the Enlightenment, you know, the
secular belief in human rights, people
like Voltater, Russo, John Lockach, that
they paved the way for the abolition of
of the slave trade. Not true. It was the
Quakers, it was the evangelicals, people
who were deeply religious and were
really like, "This is our big mission in
life. And if we don't do that, we're all
going to go to hell."
>> I mean, of course, religion's been used
in many different ways. And in exactly
the setting you're talking about, I'm
thinking about all those people who, you
know, trafficked and enslaved Africans
and then thought the most important
thing was that they should become
Christians to save their
>> Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. The whole
British establishment used religion in
all kinds of ways to indeed perpetuate
this horrible atrocity. That's
definitely true. Um, but there's another
side to that coin as well. So this
God-shaped hole that you think lots of
people are walking around
>> [clears throat]
>> um carrying, is it actually being filled
increasingly with God? Do you see a
resurgence in religion around the world?
>> I see that maybe particularly in the US.
I mean you have all these conversion
stories from JD Vance to Ayan here Ali.
>> But America's always been more religious
than a lot of Europe. That's true.
>> I wonder if you see it in the UK or in
Europe more widely.
>> I haven't. Have you? Well, I've seen
more European politicians
talk about their faith. You know,
famously in this country, Tony Blair
converted to Catholicism after he left
Downing Street and his spokesman said,
"We don't do God." I had Nigel Farah
sitting exactly where you're sitting.
>> Um, telling me he's thinking about
becoming a Catholic.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's it's hard to
read people's hearts and minds. It does
sometimes it does feel a little bit
disingenuine or sometimes there does
feel to be a political angle here or
there. So, I don't know. I I struggle
with that a bit. I tried really hard uh
to basically become a Christian. Uh it's
just that I wanted to have really good
reasons. Um and intellectual honesty is
really really important for me.
>> Talking of things you struggle with, I
wonder well what you do struggle with
morally. I know you write about
philanthropists like Bill Gates, who is
one of the funders of your organization,
and you clearly applaud the way he's
given away so much of his money,
>> but what about another big figure in
tech, someone like Elon Musk, right? I
imagine you don't have much time for
Elon Musk.
>> Well, correct.
>> There there are some people uh again who
would say like, "Oh, Elon Musk is
terrible and he's" Some people on the
left would even say like he's stupid and
he doesn't know what he's talking about.
I mean, if you cannot see that the man
is clearly a genius, then I don't know.
I have very little time for you. He's
one of the greatest entrepreneurs of
this century, maybe even the greatest
like Tesla, SpaceX, those both are both
tremendous, tremendous achievements.
>> So, the world does have shades of gray
in it then because I think sometimes
reading your book or listening to you,
you come across as very black and white.
Is that not necessarily the case?
>> Well, I think the book is actually quite
nuanced, I would like to say. I mean,
it's full of stories of the right things
happening for the right reasons.
>> You were clearly quite upset a few
months ago when you gave a lecture on
the BBC and you expressed a strong
opinion about President Trump and in the
recorded version of that, the BBC
decided that that had to be removed.
Yeah.
>> So,
>> I can understand why that made you angry
and upset. But a few months on, do you
see it a bit differently? Do you see the
complexity of the legal position that
the BBC was in?
>> No. No, honestly not. I think it was
pure cowardice. Um, and I've only Yeah,
that opinion has only become stronger to
be honest. So, let me let me give you
the whole story. What happened is that,
you know, months before I gave the
lectures, I was basically scouted by the
BBC and they approached me and said,
"Hey, we're considering you to be the
wreath lecturer this year."
>> Very prestigious.
>> I'd never heard about it, but you know,
as a Dutchman, but yeah, super
prestigious and the honor of my life,
honestly. Um then what happened is that
for months for months I worked with an
incredible team who helped me to you
know make the best lectures I'd ever
written. [clears throat] Um and at some
point we were version 32 33 I don't
know. And then it was like okay this is
it. Let's go. Um they had given me a ton
of useful feedback. They wanted me to
take out some things about Gaza for
example. I didn't do that. Um initially
I had much more about Trump and Vance. I
took that all out. I made that decision
because I thought, you know, basically
it was too predictable. Um people um
will kind of have expected that from me.
Um then it was recorded for 500 people
in the BBC radio theater. It's
absolutely fine. It's only when the
Panorama thing happens and then suddenly
they were getting worried.
>> But there had been a lawsuit brought
against the BBC by President Trump,
which is a very serious thing to happen.
And it's not the only news organization
that's been sued. And I guess what I'm
wondering is you did get to deliver the
line, the opinion you had about
President Trump to the audience, but
it's it's the way it's recorded for
posterity which is not there because the
circumstances around
>> around the moment had changed because of
President Trump's willingness to sue the
media. And I'm sure you legal issues,
the great tell me, would you would your
publisher have let you put a line like
that in your next book, do you think?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> Have you asked them that? I mean, my
Dutch publisher is publishing the
reflecture, so [laughter] they're doing
that. Uh, it's already happening. Your
UK publisher?
>> Yeah, I'm I'm happy to say it right now.
Donald Trump is the most openly corrupt
president in US history.
>> That's your opinion. You know, as
expressed to that,
>> there's really good evidence for that.
>> But I think we're really discussing
whether you are able to see any shades
of gray that there is such a thing as
legal risk and it does depend on that
risk is carried by the publisher. And
I'm not sure that your UK publisher
would let you put that in your next book
because UK liel law
>> the lecture itself is about media
networks, corporations, universities
bending the knee to the new
administration.
>> Yeah, I understand that
>> it has happened you know again and again
and again and to give a lecture you know
about that and then have it happen to
that very lecture. You haven't answer
you've gone through the whole process UK
publisher whether they would let you put
exactly that
>> we would be totally fine with that.
Yeah.
>> Have you asked them and they've told you
that?
>> Yeah. Yeah. But it's just I I already
have a book out, Moral Ambition. But
I've that line's not in this.
>> There were multiple publishers reaching
out to me after all this happened like,
"Hey, we want to publish the wreath
lectures."
>> Okay. Well, then you've probably got a
quite brave UK publisher.
>> Well, we need more brave people. That's
the whole thing. And especially the BBC,
you know, one of the most important
media institutions in the world. I think
it was so shameful and embarrassing.
this is exactly what the lecture was
about. In a way, it was proving my
point. And I mean, you're assuming that
it was because of legal advice. I don't
know that. I don't know that the lawyers
I've spoken to think that actually the
whole case is pretty weak that Trump has
and that it's more of a bullying tactic.
Well, what I was told is neither you nor
I know the full circumstances that I was
told.
>> There must have been internal
discussions about that and the BBC's
fighting a case that the president has
brought against them right now.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's talk more about
you and whether you have changed your
mind over the years on some issues and
if so what have they been?
>> Oh quite a few. Um let's see. Um I was
much more hopeful in general about the
direction in which was politics was
going. You know I wrote utopia realist a
decade ago because I honestly thought
the boring age of neoliberalism might
end and we could finally discuss
interesting new ideas again such as
universal basic income. Well, things
have been moving in in another
direction. Um,
yeah, that's that's one example.
>> Well, actually on universal basic
income, I wondered if you followed the
arguments that maybe AI gets the world
closer to that idea because
>> it will disrupt jobs so much.
>> Yeah, it's happening way faster than I
thought it would and I think it should
be on the table as a very serious policy
option right now. Um, maybe we shouldn't
call it universal basic income because
income, I mean, that kind of suggests it
comes from work, but maybe we should
call it universal basic wealth. A little
bit like Alaska, like Alaska in the 70s
discovered a lot of oil and they
decided, you know what, we're going to
give that dividend to all the
inhabitants of Alaska. And that's super
popular. It was actually done by a
conservative governor. And if you would
suggest to take that down in Alaska
today, you won't be in office for long.
So I think we need something like that
because we need to find ways to
distribute the massive bounty of AI. Um
and and otherwise what you get is just
yeah a new [clears throat] form of
feudalism if if we're not already there.
>> Would you like to be a political adviser
or even be in politics yourself?
>> You must have thought about that.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So I I very much wanted to
be in the arena after a decade being on
the outside providing commentary. I was
looking in the mirror. I didn't really
like what I saw. And we talked about
entrepreneurs. And I I I I developed
this emotion that I like to call moral
envy. I was just jealous of the people
who were actually trying things, taking
hits, falling, standing back up.
>> You mean in business, not politics?
>> In business. In politics. Anyone who
pays the price for their mistakes. Um,
and that's the problem with pundits,
with journalists, is we say all kinds of
things, but then you know the news cycle
goes on and people forget what we said
and we don't really often don't pay the
price for our mistakes
>> and you Yeah. Well, exactly. This is
probably not not the accountability. So,
wait, so what's the consequence of what
you're saying? That you decided that
you're not brave enough.
>> It's why I quit my job. So, this is the
last book for a while. I co-ounded this
organization that's like 80 hours of of
of work per week. Now, we are recruiting
the most ambitious, talented people we
can find. We're launching fellowships to
fight big tobacco. We're launching a tax
fairness fellowship this year to find
some of the most radical nerds, the best
legal and financial minds to lobby for a
global billionaire tax, which is very
necessary. We are working to accelerate
the transition to sustainable proteins.
I would love to launch an AI safety
fellowship this year as well. So it is a
bid for power just power of a different
kind or power beyond beyond influence.
>> Power. Yeah. Yeah. I I think that
politics is for power and ideals are
worthless if you don't back them up with
the actual strength. In that sense,
Steven Miller is right. I just think
that the purpose of power is to do good,
to use what you have to Yeah. follow in
the footsteps of the great moral
pioneers who came before us. So now you
sound really energized whereas earlier
on you said you were in a you know
mentally in a darker place or the world
was in a darker place than you thought
10 years ago.
>> Yeah. I think those two things are
fundamentally connected. If there's one
thing that I've believed my whole career
it is that small groups of thoughtful
committed citizens can change the world
as Margaret me said and she said it's
the only thing that ever has. So that is
exactly what we need right now. We need
small groups of really committed people
who are willing to ignore the script
that was written for them by some other
people and go on that journey and and do
the right thing. A friend of mine
studied at Oxford and he always talks
about the Bermuda triangle of talent.
You know, so many talented young people
going into consultancy, finance and
corporate law. And I'm talking
>> could be one of your kids one day.
>> Well, maybe. But I'm talking to
>> How would you feel if that happens?
>> I mean, slightly disappointed, I guess.
>> [laughter]
>> But you know, we're talking to a lot of
these young people right now, both at
Harvard, at Oxford, and many of them are
so excited to live a different kind of
life. Read the application essays they
write, you know, when they come in. It's
all about tackling poverty, tackling big
diseases, etc. But then something
happens along the way. They are
ruthlessly funneled into these cubicles.
Um, and yeah, it's kind of sad. We have
only one life on this planet. So, um,
yeah, the the message that performed
best at Harvard was you didn't fight
your way into Harvard to end up in a
job. So, um, we're having a lot of fun
with this.
>> So, you're on a new journey, on a new
sense of mission. Um, this conversation
is part of Bloomberg weekend and I
wondered where your best thinking comes
from or when it happens. Is it at the
weekend? Is that when you get like some
clear space to think?
>> Yeah, I think
>> maybe not with young children. Yeah, I
think to be honest it's in the shower
sometimes like [laughter] I need too
many showers in a day because it's like
the place where I can think best and um
it's not great for your skin but
[laughter]
>> but it's where you're on your own maybe
it's really those it's those kind of
moments or during a walk you know when
you can really take the time to order
your thoughts I think that's when it
happens. Yeah
>> Rodka Bregman thanks so much for talking
to us.
>> Thanks for having me.
Before we close this episode, some
further detail and context around Rucka
Bregman's allegation of corruption
against President Trump. Bregman's
called his view defensible and plausible
and cited a New Yorker calculation from
August 2025 of what it called the Trump
family's profitering from the
presidency. White House spokeswoman
Caroline Levit has said it's absurd for
anyone to insinuate that the president
is profiting off the presidency. The BBC
responded to Bregman's allegation of
censorship by saying this. All of our
programs are required to comply with the
BBC's editorial guidelines and we made
the decision to remove one sentence from
the lecture on legal advice.
>> [music]